Welcome back!
In this video,
we're going to revisit
SIEM tools and how
they're used alongside
playbooks to reduce
organizational threats,
risks, and vulnerabilities.
An incident response playbook is
a guide that helps
security professionals
mitigate issues with
a heightened sense of
urgency, while
maintaining accuracy.
Playbooks create structure,
ensure compliance,
and outline processes for
communication and documentation.
Organizations may use
different types of
incident response playbooks
depending on the situation.
For example, an
organization may have
specific playbooks
for addressing
different types of attacks,
such as ransomware, malware,
distributed denial of
service, and more.
To start, let's discuss how
a security analyst might use
a playbook to address a SIEM alert,
like a potential malware attack.
In this situation, a
playbook is invaluable for
guiding an analyst through
the necessary actions to
properly address the alert.
The first action in the playbook
is to assess the alert.
This means determining
if the alert is actually
valid by identifying why
the alert was
generated by the SIEM.
This can be done by analyzing
log data and related metrics.
Next, the playbook outlines
the actions and tools to
use to contain the malware
and reduce further damage.
For example, this
playbook instructs
the analyst to
isolate, or disconnect,
the infected network
system to prevent
the malware from spreading
into other parts of the network.
After containing the incident,
step three of the playbook describes
ways to eliminate all
traces of the incident
and restore the affected systems
back to normal operations.
For example, the
playbook might instruct
the analyst to restore the
impacted operating system,
then restore the
affected data using
a clean backup, created
before the malware outbreak.
Finally, once the incident
has been resolved,
step four of the playbook instructs
the analyst to perform
various post-incident
activities
and coordination efforts
with the security team.
Some actions include
creating a final report to
communicate the security
incident to stakeholders,
or reporting the incident to
the appropriate authorities,
like the U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigations
or other agencies that
investigate cyber crimes.
This is just one example of how
you might follow the
steps in a playbook,
since organizations develop
their own internal procedures
for addressing
security incidents.
What's most important to
understand is that playbooks
provide a consistent process
for security
professionals to follow.
Note that playbooks
are living documents,
meaning the security team
will make frequent changes,
updates, and improvements to
address new threats
and vulnerabilities.
In addition,
organizations learn from
past security incidents to
improve their security posture,
refine policies and procedures,
and reduce the likelihood and
impact of future incidents.
Then, they update their
playbooks accordingly.
As an entry-level
security analyst,
you may be required to
use playbooks frequently,
especially when
monitoring networks
and responding to incidents.
Having an understanding of why
playbooks are important
and how they can help you
achieve your working
objectives will
help ensure your success
within this field.